docs - contributing auth methods (#198)
ansible-collections/community.hashi_vault: docs/docsite/rst/contributor_guide.rst

.. _ansible_collections.community.hashi_vault.docsite.contributor_guide.contributing_auth_methods:

Contributing auth methods
=========================

In this collection, auth methods are shared among all plugins and modules rather than being re-implemented in each one. This saves the effort of re-inventing the wheel, prevents test bloat by having to test functionality across auth methods, and provides a consistent experience.

File location & scope
---------------------

Auth methods are implemented as classes in ``module_utils``, in a file named ``plugins/module_utils/_auth_method_<method_name>.py``. The leading underscore indicates that the module util is private to the collection and that it is not intended to be used outside the collection; this lets us make changes as needed without needing to release a new major version, and clearly indicates to would-be downstream users that they should not rely on these utils outside content within the collection.

> In addition, all module utils within the collection must contain a comment explaining this, like so:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In addition, all auth method module utils within the collection must contain a comment explaining this, such as:
```

* ``authenticate(client, use_token=False)`` -- this method performs the actual authentication, and it returns the API result of the authentication (which will include the token, lease information, etc.). The HVAC client object is passed in, as well an optional parameter ``use_token`` which specifies whether the client should have its token field set to the result of authentication (typically this is desired).

The auth method class should also contain two fields:

* ``NAME`` -- the name of the auth method.
* ``OPTIONS`` -- a list containing the name of every option that may be used by the auth method, including optional options; this list should not include the ``auth_method`` option.

Raising exceptions and warnings
-------------------------------

> Becuase auth methods are shared among both Ansible modules and Ansible plugins, any exceptions raised must be applicable to both. Standard Python exceptions like ``KeyError`` can be raised if they appropriate.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Because auth methods are shared among both Ansible modules and Ansible plugins, any exceptions raised must be applicable to both. Standard Python exceptions like ``KeyError`` can be raised if they appropriate.
```

Auth method options and documentation
-------------------------------------

Because auth methods are shared among collection content, their options are documented in doc_fragment plugins. Because many options end up being shared among many auth methods (for example ``role_id``, ``username``, ``password``), we do not have a separate doc fragment for each auth method, as this would end up with duplicated option documentation.

Instead, all of the options for auth methods are in ``plugins/doc_fragments/auth.py``.

This contains the standard ``DOCUMENTATION`` field, as well as a ``PLUGINS`` field. The reason for this split is that there are certain parts of the documentation that are only applicable to plugins; namely the ``env``, ``ini``, and ``vars`` entries.

``DOCUMENTATION`` should contains all fields common to both, like ``description``, ``type``, ``version_added``, ``required``, etc., while anything plugin-specific goes in ``PLUGINS``.

Since plugins and modules will reference the doc fragments, it's not usually required to modify the docstrings in the content directly; if it seems necessary, please raise an issue to discuss.

> Wherever possible, we should provide ``env``, ``ini``, and ``vars`` alternatives for specifying options, to give maximum flexibility for plugins. Occsionally, these won't make sense, like providing ``token`` (a sensitive value) in ``ini``.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Wherever possible, we should provide ``env``, ``ini``, and ``vars`` alternatives for specifying options, to give maximum flexibility for plugins. Occasionally, these won't make sense, like providing ``token`` (a sensitive value) in ``ini``.
```

When deciding to implement new options for an auth method, consider whether existing options can or should be reused. If a new option is needed, consider scoping its name to the auth method, in order to differentiate it from current or future option names that could be confusing in another context.

For example ``cert_auth_public_key`` and ``cert_auth_private_key`` were named that way to prevent them being confused with other certificate options that relate to the Vault connection, or other contexts where specific plugins or modules might need key pairs.

Testing auth methods
--------------------

Because auth methods are shared across the collection, we want them to be very well tested. Auth methods have both unit and integration tests, and the combination of those should give us high confidence that the methods work as intended.

Unit tests
^^^^^^^^^^

> Unit tests allow us to check some of the functionality that is difficult to test effectively in integration tests, like checking that every possible combination of options behaves as it should, or simulating conditions that we can't easily reproduce. The coverage of varius scenarios should be extensive, and the details of which, or how complext they are, will depend on the intracacies of the auth method itself. Looking at existing examples is highly recommended.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Unit tests allow us to check some of the functionality that is difficult to test effectively in integration tests, like checking that every possible combination of options behaves as it should, or simulating conditions that we can't easily reproduce. The coverage of various scenarios should be extensive, and the details of which, or how complex they are, will depend on the intricacies of the auth method itself. Looking at existing examples is highly recommended.
```

A pytest fixture is provided to load fixtures files that contain sample Vault API responses. Using these allows for mocking of the HVAC authentication calls within the unit tests.

Integration tests
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Our integration tests provide a running Vault server, and with that we can set up any auth methods we want (in theory). In practice, auth methods often require external services to integrate with. When possible, we should consider setting up such external services so that we can create a meaningful, real life integration and test it.

> Often however, this is ot possible, or difficult. We must consider that tests are not only run in CI, but should be able to be run locally as well.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Often however, this is not possible, or difficult. We must consider that tests are not only run in CI, but should be able to be run locally as well.
```
